_This is the third installment in our ongoing series
on Scrupulosity, a sub-type of Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder (OCD) focused on religious or moral
perfectionism. This article focuses exclusively on
identifying and challenging common cognitive
distortions seen in “Moral Scrupulosity”._

![Moral Scrupulosity in OCD: Cognitive Distortions](/static/images/illustrations/sign.jpeg)

Those struggling with Moral Scrupulosity OCD
can
learn to challenge their distorted thinking.


Previous articles in this series have focused on
religious Scrupulosity, which is most easily described as a pattern of
intrusive, unwanted thoughts related to one’s religious
beliefs. These unwanted thoughts are counter to the
sufferer’s faith, and lead them to perform compulsive
behaviors in an attempt to nullify or extinguish the
anxiety they experience related to these thoughts.


Conversely, the obsessions experienced in “moral”
Scrupulosity are focused not on matters of faith, but
rather on one’s personal sense of morals and ethics.
Those suffering with moral Scrupulosity experience
commonplace thoughts, feelings and actions that they
misinterpret as being evidence that they are ethically
flawed or morally bankrupt. As with all sub-types of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD), those with moral Scrupulosity seek relief from their
anxiety through various compulsive and avoidant means in
an effort to ensure that their obsessive fears do not
come true. In other words, they perform compulsive
behaviors that they hope will prevent or eliminate the
feeling that they are a “bad” person.


Moral Scrupulosity presents unique challenges that make
treatment more ambiguous and difficult in contrast with
religious Scrupulosity. For example, religious faiths
have codified rules for approved beliefs and behaviors
that can be verified via scripture, or by consulting
with certain authority figures (priests, rabbis, imams,
etc.). Conversely, there are no fixed, objective
definitions of “good” and “bad”, or “right” and “wrong”.
In times of doubt, individuals with moral Scrupulosity
have no specific religious text or church elder to whom
they can turn for counsel. Their personal belief system
– their “moral compass” – is generally based not on
religious scripture or orthodoxy, but rather has
developed over time through their upbringing and
experience. Thus, for those with moral Scrupulosity,
determining precisely what is “right” or “wrong” can be
exponentially more difficult. At the same time, those
suffering with moral Scrupulosity often have a rigid,
perfectionistic belief that they
must
strictly adhere to their personal moral code in all
matters, regardless of the situation or context. Failure
to do so is often considered unacceptable, no matter how
slight the infraction.


### Cognitive Distortions in Moral Scrupulosity

As with all forms of OCD, the most effective treatment
for moral Scrupulosity is
[Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (CBT)](https://ocdla.com/cognitivebehavioraltherapy/ "CBT for Moral Scrupulosity in OCD"). The main _cognitive_ tenet of CBT is that
irrational and unreasonable beliefs (known as
_cognitive distortions_) influence subsequent
feelings and behaviors. The central tool used in
correcting these faulty beliefs is
_Cognitive Restructuring_, which helps the
sufferer to gain a more realistic perspective in three
ways:


-  Building the sufferer’s awareness of their obsessional
     thought patterns

-  Identifying how their obsessional thoughts are
     distorted and unrealistic

-  Challenging these cognitive distortions with thoughts
     that are more rational and realistic


Some examples of cognitive distortions commonly
experienced by those with moral Scrupulosity are:


- **All-or-Nothing Thinking (Black and White
     Thinking)**-  “I may have heard someone talking about part of
         the test yesterday, so I’ll be a cheater if I
         answer any of those questions.”

    -  “If I accidentally under-report my income by $100
         on my taxes, I’m committing major tax fraud.“

- **Discounting/ Minimizing the Positive**-  “It doesn’t matter that I often give money to
         homeless people – I’m a horrible person because I
         didn’t give any money to a homeless person today.”

    -  “I am a terrible person because I didn’t prepare
         as well as I usually do for my team presentation
         at work.”

- **Emotional Reasoning**-  “I am a bad wife because I noticed another man who
         is attractive.”

    -  “It would be really mean and unforgivable if I
         gave my classmate constructive criticism about her
         assignment.”

- **Should/ Must Thinking (Perfectionism)**-  “I must always tell the truth, no matter what,
         because it’s the right thing to do.”

    -  “I should never drive over the speed limit, no
         matter what.”

- **Hyper-Responsibility**-  “If I don’t remind my wife to wear her seatbelt,
         she’ll be in violation of the law and it’ll be my
         fault.”

    -  “I cannot watch the movie Free Willy because it’ll
         mean I’m supporting harm to Killer Whales.”

The goal of cognitive restructuring is to challenge and
replace irrational, fear-based beliefs with thoughts
that are more reasonable, realistic, and objective. For
example, one can challenge the belief that they should
never find anyone but their spouse attractive with a
more realistic thought that it is normal to find other
people attractive, and that what really matters is what
one chooses to do in response to those feelings.
Likewise, one can challenge the thought that they are a
cheater because they heard other students talking about
an exam by reminding themselves that they studied hard,
and already knew the answers to the questions that were
on the test.


It is worth noting that the process of cognitive
restructuring has the potential to become a compulsion
in its own right.  When challenging your distorted
thinking, it is important that you not compulsively
review either your obsessive thoughts, or your cognitive
challenges to those thoughts.  The goal is to
quickly establish whether a thought is in fact
distorted, and if so, to challenge it with a more
balanced thought.  If you find yourself repeatedly
evaluating whether your cognitive challenge is “good” or
“right”, it’s a good bet that you are inadvertently
using cognitive restructuring as a compulsion.


Ultimately, the long-term goal of cognitive
restructuring is to stop blindly accepting the
irrational thoughts that present themselves to your
mind, and to instead develop a pattern of challenging
them. With conscious effort, your mind’s default
position will shift from unquestioning acceptance of
distorted thoughts to a more realistic way of thinking
that is based on reason rather than fear.


### Common Challenges in Cognitive Restructuring for Moral  Scrupulosity

Of course, this process is not as simple as it sounds.
The human mind loves to create disastrous scenarios, and
it is likely to take repeated effort over time to change
well-established thought patterns. Furthermore, reality
is not as cut-and-dried as logic. For example, take the
issue of driving no higher than the speed limit. Most
people would agree that, as part of being a responsible
member of society, it is generally a good idea to follow
traffic laws. And if you don’t, you may get a speeding
ticket with a hefty fine, or worse, have an avoidable
accident.


However, in some situations it may be advisable to break
the law and go above the speed limit, such as in the
case of exceptionally fast moving freeway traffic. Even
the DMV would advise you match the average speed of
others on the road. In other situations, such as an
emergency drive to the hospital or some other
life-threatening scenario, driving faster than the
posted speed limit may actually be a matter of life and
death.


These exceptions to the rule illustrate the grey-area
nature of real life. Simply put, there are some
situations where not being entirely “good” or “right” is
preferred, or even necessary. It is also worth noting
that bringing logic and reason to emotion may not always
change a feeling – try to reason your way into, or out
of, loving someone. Now imagine the difficulty of
challenging a thought for which there are no codified
laws, such as being honest with your spouse, or
exhibiting responsibility towards others.


As this suggests, given the inherent ambiguity of trying
to “live right”, challenging cognitive distortions will
only get one so far in managing moral Scrupulosity. As
noted above, in contrast to
[religious Scrupulosity](https://ocdla.com/scrupulosity-ocd-cognitive-distortions-3160/ "Scrupulosity in OCD: Cognitive Distortions"), moral behavior has no standard doctrine for behavior
or belief. For example, a common belief is “It is wrong
to kill another person”. But in the case of war or
self-defense it may be necessary. Likewise, most people
believe it is wrong to steal. But if your family is
starving to death, stealing may be the most noble option
possible.


A more common moral ambiguity faced by many people in
America is the matter of “tipping” for services
rendered. By American standards, most people consider
tipping a “good” thing to do. However, there is no hard
and fast rule for the amount one should tip – 10%, 15%,
20%? If you ask ten people, you are likely to get ten
different opinions, including variations based on the
type of service being rendered, and how well the service
was provided.


But a person suffering with moral Scrupulosity may be
obsessively concerned with how much to tip, and with the
criteria by which that decision is made. Their belief is
that they
must tip
the “right” amount. It is a moral imperative.
Furthermore, their anxiety may be exacerbated by their
exaggerated fear of harming the person providing the
service – “what if the waiter can’t pay his rent because
of my tip being inadequate?”. All this concern over a
gesture that by all objective measures is optional.


### The Role of Values In Cognitive Restructuring for Moral  Scrupulosity

Effective management of moral Scrupulosity ultimately
comes down to making choices based on one’s motivation
for action. In short, are your actions done because you
prefer acting a certain way, and prefer a certain
outcome, or because you are trying to avoid feelings of
distress and anxiety related to your irrational fears.
For individuals in the throes of moral Scrupulosity,
simple everyday decisions are often based not on choice,
but on fear. Do you tip 20% because it makes you feel
good to support the hard work of others, or because
tipping less would result in your feeling guilty,
anxious, or fearful? Since a firm standard does not
exist, it seems reasonable that one should act in
accordance with their true values, while accepting the
potential costs of upholding those values (such as
feeling short-term guilt, or worrying that others may
possibly think you’re stingy).


In order to guide your choices by your values, you first
need to evaluate both the intended action, and the
perceived consequences of alternative choices. If you
are suffering with moral Scrupulosity, consider asking
yourself these questions when faced with a situation in
which you are experiencing moral ambiguity:


-  What does my OCD say will happen if I don’t do my
     compulsion?

-  What has been the outcome in previous situations in
     which I have experienced this moral concern?

-  Objectively, what is actually the most likely outcome?

-  What do I fear it will say about my character if I do
     something different?

-  Who or what suffers if I make my choice based on my
     fearful obsession?

-  What other possible choices can I can make in this
     situation?

-  What about my choice do I actually care about and want
     in my life?

-  Is my choice in this situation based on my true
     values, or on my fear of experiencing anxiety or
     discomfort?

-  What might I gain by choosing my action based on my
     true values rather than on fear?


Using these questions to evaluate a fear-based thought
can help you decide if that thought is a cognitive
distortion. And if your proposed action and its outcome
do not align with your life goals and values, you can
choose to instead accept the anxiety that comes with
experiencing your irrational, distorted thought. The
alternative – guiding your life with the goal of anxiety
avoidance – will typically lead to an abandonment of the
life you actually want.


### Integrating Cognitive Restructuring, Values, and  Behavioral Change

Taking control over your behaviors can be emotionally
difficult, especially when what you have been doing
“feels right” (even if it costs you time, money, energy,
or relationships). The ultimate aim of treatment for
moral Scrupulosity is to accept and tolerate temporary
discomfort in order to gain eventual freedom by acting
according to your true goals and values. A decision to
do
something different is entirely up to you, and will be
motivated by your evaluation of the costs of avoiding
anxiety versus the benefits of going against your fears
by making bold, personally valuable choices.


If you determine that your behavioral responses to your
irrational thoughts are out of sync with your values and
character, the next step is to begin exercises to
progressively challenge and change your actions in
response to your fears. The best approach to this is a
CBT technique called
[Exposure and Response Prevention (ERP)](https://ocdla.com/exposure-therapy-ocd-anxiety-1944/ "Exposure Therapy for OCD and Anxiety"), which is the most effective method of promoting both
a tolerance of irrational feelings of anxiety, and a
long-term reduction in distress. ERP for Scrupulosity
will be discussed in greater detail in a following
article. In the meantime, if you are suffering with
moral Scrupulosity, remember that your excessive anxiety
is an exaggerated response to feared, irrational
thoughts. The path to freedom is to challenge these
thoughts, accept short-term discomfort, resist giving in
to compulsive behaviors, and act in accordance with your
true goals and values.


_•Kevin Foss, MFT and Tom Corboy, MFT are licensed
psychotherapists at the[OCD Center of Los Angeles](https://ocdla.com/ "Treatment at the OCD Center of Los Angeles"), a private, outpatient clinic specializing in
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (CBT) for the treatment
of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) and related
anxiety based conditions._
